a lot of the truths that psychologists
have stumbled over let's say are
actually quite painful i mean i reviewed
the iq literature for about 20 years
trying to get to the bottom of it and
it's very distressing to realize how
wide the
human differential is in cognitive
ability it's it's really quite a
staggering thing to understand how broad
that gap is and how much pain that
causes especially at the lower end of
the distribution and the fact that
men are stringently selected for let's
say the capacity to acquire a position
in a competence hierarchy and women are
brutally punished in terms of their
sexual attractiveness for not
manifesting signs of fertility and youth
it's like there's a real harshness to
that but it's the harshness i think it's
the harshness of life
and actually understanding that makes it
less harsh insofar as understanding is
useful yeah yeah no i i would agree with
that and you know i mean i i've stumbled
across a lot of findings in my research
and and we'll get to the issue of
conflict between the sexes uh that that
i find
personally distressing you know that i i
wish didn't exist
but they do and so i i feel
similarly that you know we're better off
confronting
our nature and the empirical reality
including sex differences in that nature
rather than just pretending that
these features don't exist
[Music]
hello everybody i'm very pleased today
to have as my guest dr david bass who's
been a real influence on my thinking i
think perhaps more than any other living
psychologist i respect and have learned
from what he's done
david bass is a professor of psychology
at the university of texas at austin he
previously taught at harvard and at the
university of michigan
he is considered the world's leading
scientific expert on strategies of human
mating
of all the interesting things and is one
of the founders of the field of
evolutionary psychology
his many books include the evolution of
desire strategies of human mating
evolutionary psychology the new science
of the mind the dangerous passion why
jealousy is as necessary as love and sex
the murderer next door why the mind is
designed to kill and why women have sex
which you'd think would definitely be a
bestseller his new book
when men behave badly the hidden roots
of sexual deception harassment and
assault was published in 2021 and it
uncovers the evolutionary roots of
conflict between the sexes
dr boss has more than 300 scientific
publications and just to give those of
you who are listening uh some sense of
what that means you can get a phd from a
pretty top-rated research institution in
psychology with three publications a
thesis made of three publications and so
to have 300 publications is in some
sense the equivalent of 100 phds so
that's worth thinking about for a while
in 2019 he was cited as one of the 50
most influential living psychologists in
the world
so i'm very pleased that you agreed to
talk with me today about these
contentious topics and i would like to
re state what i said earlier which is
your work has been very uh influential
uh as far as i'm concerned i've really
liked reading everything you've done for
the last 20 years i haven't read all of
it but i've read lots of it and
so well thank you it's a
my pleasure to be talking to you i've
been reading your work for some time and
i've been looking forward to this
conversation for a long time
so maybe you could start by telling
telling everyone telling me why did you
get interested in evolutionary
psychology per se how did that come
about and when because you were one of
the founders of this field which is a
burgeoning field and an important one
tying psychology to evolutionary biology
a crucial thing to do
yes so uh well basically when i started
my academic career there was no such
thing as evolutionary psychology uh you
know and i was trained uh in personality
psychology at uc berkeley um but what i
was interested in and the reason that i
got into personality psychology was i
was interested in human nature you know
what are what motivates people what are
the goals towards which people
aspire and seek what gets people out of
bed in the morning what makes people
tick you know what what is human nature
made of and when i got into the field of
personality i went through all the the
standard theories
uh freud uh jung
kelly maslow you know you know the the
list and
all or many seem to have some intuitive
appeal but none seem to be grounded in a
foundation in a solid scientific
foundation and that's really what
ultimately what led me to evolutionary
theory that is to try to identify what
are the causal processes that created
human nature whatever that nature may be
you know even
even the the more biologically oriented
psychologists
the the behaviorists for example like
skinner the people who studied rats and
who did that so carefully because that's
a great tradition and it really led to
the emergence of neuroscience
there was not a lot of evolutionary
thinking there because underlying that
behaviorist ethos was the idea that
human beings were something like a blank
slate and that almost everything we did
was learned
yes yeah it indeed and uh skinner
believed he actually overlapped a bit
with him at harvard he was so i was able
to actually have a couple conversations
with him and he believed that
what evolution had created was simply
a couple of domain general learning
mechanisms classical conditioning
operant conditioning were the ones that
he focused on and he built this whole
theory about that but essentially what
she equipped humans and rats or pigeons
with this blank slate
domain general uh learning mechanisms
and then all subsequent action is based
on contingencies of reinforcement
uh and and so um you know but but i
think even
then even when i was in graduate school
that view struck me as really
problematic
for one thing uh sex differences i mean
emerge very early in life you know rough
and tumble play by age three or so
emerges consistently early in
development and sense of humor
uh sense of humor and and these things
are cross-culturally universal uh and so
uh the notion that
all of our nature consists just of the
contingencies of reinforcement during
our lifespan struck me as as problematic
and so and so really that search for a
solid scientific foundation for a theory
of human nature is what led me to
evolutionary theory uh and
uh and then of course reading people
like uh trevors don simons
uh george c williams uh of course w d
hamilton some of the great evolutionary
biologists of the last century
led me to the view that i could actually
test some evolutionary hypotheses in
humans and at the time of what i started
there were almost no empirical tests and
you know if you know anything about
the kind of berkeley minnesota tradition
a lot of my mentors were minnesota
there's a very strong empirical
tradition and so as a psychologist
trained in an empirical tradition you
have to test these things and what i
realized is that there were almost no
empirical tests of these evolutionary
hypotheses and so and so that's what led
me to that and
uh and and some of the most obvious ones
were mating so as a sexually reproducing
species
everything has to go through mating
and so if humans don't have
pretty interesting and complex uh
psychological adaptations for mating
then we're kind of out of business so i
mean survival and mating but if you're
sexually reproducing species you have to
go through the bottleneck of mating
you know and that is it's not a simple
process of course if you're asexual um
you know you don't have to go searching
for a mate but uh sexually reproducing
species you have to select a mate you
have to attract a mate you in our
species you have to be mutually selected
by that mate
and uh and then in our species of course
we have long-term mating parabonda
mating
which is extremely rare in the mammalian
world the male male and king we have
something like 5 000 species plus of
mammals and only something like three to
five percent have anything resembling
pair-bonded long-term mating but humans
do have it it's um it's it's part and
that's part of our nature
uh now as we get into uh mating
strategies
one of the things that i argue is is
that long-term mating is not the only
mating strategy within the human menu of
mating strategies and we have long-term
pair bundle but we also have short-term
mating casual uh sex hookups as they're
now called on college campuses
we have
some infidelity rates so that's kind of
a mixed mating strategy one long-term
mate
some
short-term sex partners on the side
and then we also do serial mating and
then if you look across cultures we have
um
in western cultures a presumptively
monogamous mating system but some
cultures have pollutionist mating
systems one man multiple wives some
restricted to four some don't have any
restrictions
and then very very rarely do you have a
polyandrous mating system uh less than
one percent where it's one woman
multiple men
so anyway and you know do you have any
sense of what conditions give rise to
that rare exception that polyandra
system since it's so uncommon how is it
that it sustains itself and
and why isn't that a challenge to the
notion of of of central monogamy let's
say
yes well uh it the conditions under
which it occurs are typically where one
man
cannot support a whole family so if
there's a large
field
and one man can't support a wife and
children then it will be two men so the
polyandrus mating is almost entirely
brothers
and that genetic relatedness
uh helps to
ease what normally would be a pretty
intense jealous reaction to someone else
have you know sharing a
a sex partner someone else having sex
with your your wife
um but um and so why why isn't it
sufficient to say
like this or more modern blank slate
theorists might that patriarchy is a
sufficient explanation for the
difference in mating strategies across
the sexes and that the reason that
polyandry is so uncommon is because
women have are dominated by men
everywhere and that's arbitrary and
expression of power it has nothing to do
with our central biological tendency
okay that's a really interesting uh
question and i have a couple of
different thoughts uh on it first of all
the question the first question is like
what does one mean by patriarchy and if
you get into if you get into it and and
i've asked people who invoke those sort
of explanations well what do you mean by
patriarchy and usually that causes them
to stumble and mumble around well and
they just know well patriarchy is though
it's self-explanatory well it's not
self-explanatory uh because they're
if you break it down analytically you
can identify different components so is
it the case that men worldwide tend to
have more resources more economic
resources than women on average well the
answer is is yes but then even if you
take that component of what's called
patriarchy you can ask the question well
how did it come to pass that across all
cultures or nearly all cultures men on
average have more resources well as one
biological anthropologist i think this
was irv devore at harvard he said men
are one long breeding experiment run by
women
and
you know basically one of the things
that one of my first studies the 37
culture study documented is that women
have a universal preference for men with
resources
and so that sets up a co-evolutionary
process whereby those men who were
chosen as mates
tended to be motivated and have the
ability and willingness to acquire
resources
so let me ask you about that
specifically this is a question that i
tried to address experimentally at one
point but i couldn't get the experiments
organized properly to test this specific
hypothesis
do you know of any research petting
female mate choice in relationship to
men against
men who have resources versus men who
show the traits that allow them to
acquire acquire resources pitting those
directly against one another yeah a
great question and and i'm not aware of
any studies that have done that directly
see i think that and this is i want to
talk to you about this in relationship
to the dark triad issue which we'll get
into it seems to me that women use
markers of status
partly as indicators of available
resources because those are useful but i
don't think women are
that unc uncanny let's say it's too
simple i think they use the presence of
resources as a proxy for the personality
and cognitive traits let's say including
physical health that would enable a man
even stripped of his current set of
resources to be highly likely to acquire
them in the future and and maybe current
recurrent resources are a good proxy for
that
yeah i think it it yeah so what one
issue
is that cash economies are relatively
recent in our in our human history i
think
maybe seven to ten thousand years old or
so
uh
and so there you know so we are able to
stockpile economic resources in a way
that was is evolutionarily unprecedented
due to cash economies but i think that
you're absolutely right that what women
tend to look for and this shows up even
in my studies as well is the
characteristics that are
statistically reliably correlated with
resource acquisition which will be
things like
uh intelligence social status uh
dependability
uh athletic prowess
uh you know is this guy a good hunter
you know so you go to
a culture like the aceh of paraguay and
you know basically what leads to high
status in
men is hunting skills that's like the
the big main main effect there
uh
and so um so i think even things like
you know that i know you've talked about
this and you you measure them as some of
the big five characteristics even things
like emotional stability and
conscientiousness which we know is
linked with
uh hard work and industriousness
and achievement in in modern work
context likely was true ancestrally as
well you know so women didn't want a guy
who's going to be sitting around in the
hammock all day uh smoking whatever the
local uh you know weed or or or
hallucinogen is you know she she's gonna
want a guy who has the
motivation to get out there and and hunt
and bring back the bacon so to speak
yeah and the hunting thing is really
interesting when you think about also
how much we've abstracted ourselves out
of our basic biological niche in some
sense you know because
hunting and getting to the point and
hitting the target and aiming right and
being specific with words and all of
that that that kind of goal-oriented
action those are all very tightly
related as far as i can tell
psychologically and so and then you said
something quite early
interesting earlier as well that we
didn't comment on
you talked about men as a breeding
experiment run by women and and this
ties into another reason why
evolutionary psychology is so important
is because we're unbelievably highly
sexually selected and that has to do
with women's choosing us and so maybe
maybe we could we could start our
discussion of sexual differences and
mating strategy with that so first of
all what's the evidence that suggests
that women are in fact choosier when it
comes to sexual partners than men and
how much choosier are they okay okay
great question well so maybe first we
could just define
for listeners what sexual selection
theory is because most people when they
think about evolution they think of
survival of the fittest and that sort of
nature-written tooth and cloth yes and a
kind of a randomness too which you know
that's kind of implicit in the natural
selection theory where sexual selection
is anything but random
yeah absolutely so so sexual selection
so if if natural selection this is
oversimplified but is
the evolution of adaptations due to
their survival advantage or the survival
advantage that accrued to the possessors
uh so things like fear of snakes fear of
heights spiders darkness strangers and
so forth food preferences things that
led to better survival sexual selection
deals with the evolution of qualities
that lead to mating success
and darwin identified two causal
processes by which mating success could
uh occur one is same-sex competition or
intra-sexual competition and the logic
there is that whatever
uh he he thought about it in terms of
contest competition where there was a
physical battle like two stags locking
horns in combat
uh with the victor gaining sexual access
to the female loser ambling off with a
broken antler dejected with low
self-esteem and probably needing some
psychotherapy
but the logic was whatever qualities led
to success in these same-sex battles
whether it be athleticism
uh
strength agility cunning or whatever
those qualities get passed on in greater
numbers due to the sexual access that
the victors accrued
uh qualities associated losing basically
bit the evolutionary dust
uh the second component so that's
intrasexual competition which actually
the logic is more general than darwin
and vision so like in our species as we
were alluding to
we often compete for position and status
hierarchies uh
and so we we can engage in intrasexual
competition without engaging in this
physical battle or contest competition
although i think that the contest
competition was also part
of human evolutionary history with with
males the other component process is
basically what darwin called female
choice and the logic there is that
whatever qualities if there's some
consensus about the qualities that are
desired that men possessing the desired
qualities have a mating advantage they
have preferentially chosen those lacking
the desired qualities basically become
in cells or involuntarily cell but they
get shunned banished or ignored
uh now the the twist on that and and so
i think sexual selection is is by far a
more interesting process and definitely
has occurred with respect to humans
but the twist there is that we have
mutual mate choice at least when it
comes to long-term mating especially i
should say especially when it comes to
long-term mating
and that gets to the issue of uh
trevor's theory of parental investment
where he said he asked the question well
which sex does the choosing which sex
does the competing
uh and he his answer was the sex that
invests more
in offspring tends to be cheesier sex
that invest less tends to be more
competitive for access to those
desirable members of the opposite sex
but in long-term mating
now we know from our reproductive
biology that women have that nine month
pregnancy which is obligatory so women
can't say look i'm i'm really busy with
my career i really only want to put in
three months it's just part of our
reproductive biology uh to produce one
child and men can produce that same
child through one act of sex and so
so women are at least in
when it comes to sex the choosier sex
the higher investing sex in part because
the costs of making a bad mating
decision are much more severe for women
than for men men and women hook up have
sex for one night in the morning they
both realize oh this is a mistake i
shouldn't have done that well if the
woman gets pregnant
then she might be pregnant with a guy
who is not going to invest in her
offspring a guy perhaps is someone that
has a poor genetic material
it does not have a robust immune system
et cetera
so so anyway so that's uh that's a
long-winded answer to your question
about uh sexual selection
good so let's go ahead please go ahead
oh i was just gonna say that the you
asked about the evidence uh for females
being cheesier and they are cheesy or
primarily in the context of casual sex
or short-term sex so that's where you
find the big sex differences and so one
of the classic
and there is there's a ton of evidence
for this this is a a
sex difference that that i capture in
the book under the category of desire
for sexual variety
so men have a much greater desire for
meaning a variety of sex partners
than than women do and so the choosiness
comes in
on i'll just give you one experiment
this is a classic study done by
elaine haffield and russell clark where
they had male and female
confederates which
uh for listeners are members of the
experimental team it doesn't mean people
from the south united states uh
uh but they had male and female
confederates simply walk up to members
of the opposite sex on a college campus
and say hi
i've been noticing you around campus
lately i find you very attractive would
you and they asked them one of three
questions would you go on a date with me
tonight would you come back to my
apartment with me would you have sex
with me and it was between groups
designs they simply recorded the
percentage of individuals who agreed to
these three different requests and of
the women
about half about little over 50 percent
agreed to go out on a date with the guy
six percent agreed to go back to his
apartment zero percent agreed to have
sex with him most women need a little
more information
uh about the guy before they're willing
to have sex uh of the men approach also
about 50 by the female confederate about
50 agreed to go out on the date
69 agreed to go back to her apartment
and 75 agreed to have sex with her and
so if you talk about choosing us
um uh are you willing to have sex with a
total stranger who you've met for 30
seconds uh women
unwilling to
and in general uh men very willing to
and this is a study that's been
replicated now in several european
studies very difficult to do this as you
might imagine to get this by the irbs or
ethics committees in in the united
states anyway um i assume it's similar
in canada or worse
yeah the kinds of studies we really want
to do are more difficult to do nowadays
but it's been replicated in in
several western europe european
countries and you can get women off of
the zero percent you can get a few
percent of the women saying yes if the
guy's really really charming you know if
he's a brad pitt or or i don't know what
the modern equivalent is ryan gosling or
one of the uh you know or or perhaps a
famous rock star
so um so but that's one illustration of
uh
the answer to your question about well
what is the evidence for female
choosiness now the interesting thing
here's i'll give you one more so there's
studies that ask what is the minimum
percentile of intelligence that you
would accept in a potential partner so
and then you and you know we explain
percentiles to people so they understand
99th percentile 1st percentile 50th and
so forth and um and basically for things
like a marriage partner
uh men and women are roughly equal they
both are very exact and they say what
they want like say 65th the 70th
percentile intelligence
where the sex difference comes up is
just a sex partner a pure sex partner
with no investment uh women still
maintain they still want let's say 60th
or 60 plus percentile in intelligence
whereas men drop you know to
embarrassing levels that doesn't really
it becomes irrelevant the 35th 40th
percentile men go you know if she can
mumble a little bit that's fine or or
even not so um that's another indication
of female choosiness that that is they
maintain
greater choosiness
when it comes to short-term sex
and um
and are simply less comfortable with
having sex with total strangers or
casual sex and uh here's i'll give you
one more now that i'm rambling on and
then i'll get to some other uh
interesting issues is uh this is an item
on the sociosexuality
inventory that
colleagues steve gangstad and jeff
simpson developed a long time ago but
one of the items is that's an attitude
item and it says sex without love is
okay
do you agree with that or disagree with
that and there you get a large sex
difference so in the seven point scale
where four is the midpoint uh men
average about 5.5 so they say yeah sex
without love yeah yeah that's okay
uh women are about 3.5 okay they're
below the uh that midpoint that's
another indication
um of this sex difference in choosing
this do you know if that's modulated by
big five trait agreeableness
oh that's a great question i i haven't
seen
any studies that link that okay uh big
five to two that item were the
sociosexuality inventory in general yeah
well you'd wonder like
if compassion and empathy might be one
of the things driving that and the value
that's placed on that as a consequence
of being high or low in agreeableness
and that would fit into some degree with
the dark triad work that because the
primary difference there is we'll talk
about the dark trend in a minute is that
the dark triad types are low and
agreeableness centrally it's not the
only thing but that's central
yeah
and that's where there's a big there's a
big sex difference and so i want to ask
you a terminological question
sure okay so
i'm sorry please
sorry to interrupt but i just uh thought
we we
should say a few more words about your
question about patriarchy yes um
because i thought that was a really
interesting question and there's some
interesting complexities
associated with that and so what i what
i started with is that um you know you
have to break it down into
analytically into precisely what causal
process you're invoking and usually when
people invoke it it's like this
mysterious uh causal force in the ether
that somehow comes down and infects
people's minds
and they don't get into the question of
well
what are the causal origins of what
you're calling patriarchy you know uh
and uh and to get to that you have to
get to things like
female mate preferences and the
co-evolution of those mate preferences
with male mating strategies
you know and and and the part of male
mating strategies
is to prioritize
resource acquisition and clawing their
way up the status hierarchy and
you know
selling their
grandmother to to get ahead uh and and
studies of this gets to another sex
difference that women
tend to allocate their time energy and
investment across a wider array of uh
you know what we call adaptive problems
so you know they women more than men
invest in kin
even if they're married they invest more
in their in-laws
uh in their friendships
uh et cetera and men on average tend to
be more mono-maniacal about getting
ahead
so so you could say you could say the
most effective long-term strategy for
smashing the patriarchy is for women to
select low-ranking mates to sleep with
yes so if you i should get in lots of
trouble for that
well well if women change their mate
preferences so that they didn't care
about
status and resources and uh those or
those qualities
and you iterated that over enough
generations yeah it would it would
ultimately change male behavior
so okay let i have a terminological
issue that that was raised to me by one
of my graduate students a
very very intelligent man um and very
careful thinker uh i had faster graduate
students but i don't think i had any who
would worry a problem absolutely to
death as much as he would he always got
to he was an engineer and as an engineer
and he would really get to the bottom of
things like you did with the patriarch
at least to some degree he told me
once i started speaking more public he
said stop using the term dominance
hierarchy or status hierarchy
it there's there's a political
supposition nested inside there that's
not helpful
how about competence hierarchy
and i thought oh that's real interesting
okay so that's one issue now i have
another question that's
teamed with that that i want to run by
you
with regards to sexual selection
so we could say that it's the actions of
female selection that have shaped men to
a large degree because of the choosing
this of women but i want to run a
counter position by you
you know so imagine a football team in a
small american town you know it's kind
of an archetypal issue and
the whole town is celebrating the
football team and the football team is
ranked in terms of competence and
the football team wins a game and all
the guys lift the quarterback up on
their shoulders because he was the hero
of the game and they march him out of
the
the uh the stadium and so he sleeps with
the cheerleaders
and i would say he was elected by the
men to sleep with them
because if it's not competitive like i
don't i think the idea that it's
competition exactly
isn't it's not exactly right and
terminology really matters it's like
because men will organize themselves
into groups and those who become
elevated in status don't do it by
dominating you know my students said
well you don't get people to wear a
choke collar and a chain
it's not dominance and so
yeah so
so well that's i i'm so glad that you
asked that because uh we just it this
the whole subject of status hierarchies
and dominance hierarchies something that
we are studying now in my lab and we
just published a paper that confirms
precisely the point that you're making
where we looked at
um
basically
whether status is determined by
dominance which we uh which in the
literature is sometimes defined as cost
infliction so you have the ability and
willingness to inflict costs and you
know beat up you know your rivals or
confer benefits which gets to your point
about competence um and what we found is
that in our our study this is with
patrick durkee a current graduate
student of mine who actually just passed
his dissertation defense yesterday so
congratulations shout out to patrick uh
is that what we found is that it is
conferring benefits that is the ability
and willingness to confer benefits that
led to high status okay so i'm going to
stop just for one sec because i want to
add something with regard to our
discussion of the patriarchy
because one of the
unspoken suppositions of the idea of the
patriarchy is that part of the reason
that it's bad is because it's dominance
and oppression that leads to the
formation of these hierarchies
and that's a central claim but
this gets to the
a real alternative to that which and so
what do you mean by benefit exactly in
that context so so well these are are um
conferring benefits on either
individuals or the group that you're
part of and so the example that you used
of the quarterback who you know scored
the winning touchdown or led the team to
victory he's conferring a large benefit
on the coalition of which he's a part
uh and so and we evolved as coalitional
species but the benefits are are many in
number i mean they could be you know
meet from the hunt providing not just to
your family but also to the group in
small group living they often shared the
uh spoils of the hun
um providing physical protection
uh so having the ability bravery so the
physical uh physical ability the
athleticism but also the courage to
offer protection for a potential mate or
for members of your coalition so there
are many many different types of
benefits i read recently that among uh
smaller groups that are dependent on
hunting that in the mail groups where
hunting takes place one of the most
common characteristics of the hunters
with more prowess is they're willing to
be self-sacrificing in their food choice
after they kill something and so the men
are have status conferred on them well
they were successful hunters but if they
can be successful hunters and give
someone else who was there a bigger
share than they get even though they did
the hunting that's a way of moving up in
status and that kind of behavior is very
common in men's groups in small
societies around the world
yes the opposite of narcissism
interestingly enough yeah yeah no that's
right and that's why in our study of we
had 240 things that could either
increase or decrease your status uh and
one of them was precisely that
generosity with resources so you can
have all the resources in the world but
if you're stingy and don't share them
with uh with your group then you're not
going to be rising in status
uh but um but i just had one one um
interesting curly cue to your point
about this uh and and that's uh the aceh
that i mentioned earlier tim hill is the
uh bioanthropologist who's studied the
aceh in the greatest deities lived with
them on and off for 25 years or so
and
what he uh said
niyache hunting skill
uh they also share their resources so
the hunt the large game animal goes to a
central distributor okay but and here's
the interesting curlicue sometimes the
head hunter will
slice off a prime piece of meat and have
a friend or emissary give it to his
affair partner before returning to the
home base
and and so
good hunters tend to have more sex
partners in in the aceh and i suspect in
many hunter-gatherer groups right and
that would be that would be a specific
exception that would be of sexual
benefit to that hunter outside the
general sexual benefit that generosity
would give him as a consequence of being
of high status among the among his uh
his cohort
yeah absolutely and and one of the
things that's kind of building on your
point about this generous issue of
generosity with resources is that
um
people form groups so and often there's
competition
between groups for
having members that are in this case
good hunters or who contribute you know
uh above and beyond to the group welfare
and so if if a hunter feels like he if
if someone is a top hunter and he feels
like he's not sufficiently appreciated
by the group he can go to another group
or form another group and that's one of
the interesting things about you know
this gets into human history is
um you know once group you know there's
the the fissioning of groups once they
get to a certain point they often say
look i'm i'm not sufficiently
appreciated in this group i'm going to
take my allies and form my own group so
i was also thinking about this in terms
of uh let's say reciprocity
so imagine that
we're in a small hunting group we don't
have refrigeration so we're not going to
be able to store meat with any great
degree of of of
reliability so you might say well what's
the best way to store meat
and i would say you should store meat in
your status among the hunting group
right so if you're generous and you
share
and then that evo invokes recep
reciprocity from other hunters in your
group who also have prowess then you've
stored future meat in the potential for
them to generate resources in the future
and that's reciprocity dependent and so
that's also a way that that that kind of
long-term honesty could also be selected
for in these status so-called status
hierarchies
competence hierarchies is better and so
my student he said there's a there's a
uh subterranean marxism in the
terminology
it's status hierarchy dominance
hierarchy implies that it's oppression
that's building the hierarchies and
that's that's something really worthy of
note that that that objection
yeah so so well let me let me let me
come back to that in just one second
that um i think it actually was uh i i
just recently saw your interview with
steve pinker uh and and jonathan hyatt
and steve pinker is uh you know i think
a wonderful
uh thinker and the way he phrased it is
that hunters store meat uh not on the
refrigerator but they store meat in the
bodies of other people so it's kind of
an interesting way to to think about
that of how we engage in that
reciprocity
so um with respect to the oppression
issue here's here's what i would
add to this is that one of the implicit
assumptions
of people who invoke patriarchy
as an explanation
is that they assume that men are somehow
united in their interests as a group in
oppressing women as a group okay and
from an evolutionary perspective
that can't occur
because men are primarily in competition
with other men
uh not with other women and also each of
us each individual has alliances with
some members of our own sex some
rivalries with members of our own sex
but also
alliances with some members of the
opposite sex so every man has
for example a mother sometimes a
daughter a sister an aunt a niece and
similarly every woman has a brother a
father you know etc and so and so the
notion that men are somehow united and
as a group with a goal of oppressing
women as a group it just can't occur
uh from an evolutionary perspective and
so and and this is why i think um an
evolutionary perspective lends some
conceptual clarity to some of these
vaguer notions that people don't tend to
think about when they invoke terms like
patriarchy so but i agree with you on
the point of oppression
that when we talk about status
hierarchies we don't mean oppression
what we did is what patrick dirky and i
did in our studies basically is we
pitted the the dominance explanation or
some people have invoked a dual pathways
they some people say there's two ways to
get ahead you can inflict costs or you
can confer benefits
uh and we tested that
and then
what's called a competence model so
there is a theory of status that's
that's basic incompetence but it's
basically benefit conferral and we found
evidence
in favor of the competence model and the
benefit control model but almost no
evidence for the cost inflicting model
indeed what we found is that
although sometimes people
have the ability and willingness to
inflict costs
you have to be more differentiated even
about that so for example we took we've
been talking about coalitions to some
degree and
uh people punish uh free riders for
example or or cheaters yeah
yeah yeah they punish them so that's an
inflection of cost yeah it's an
affliction of costs but it's
for the the larger group for the larger
coalition and so and so that's why
this notion that you could or even like
if you take extreme cases like uh as
as i'm sure you're familiar with like in
some
nation some people kill to get to the
top of the hierarchy so big daddy i mean
uh and i can't remember which country it
was maybe zimbabwe or zaire i can't
remember
basically was it was a thug who who
killed his way to the top but you can't
get to the top through this cost
inflicting
friction strategy unless you're also
conferring benefits and so even he even
though he was a thug and continued his
kind of reign of terror he had a large
um coalition of um under him uh that all
the benefits went to
right that was the idiom in uganda
uganda yes yes
thank you yes yes
okay so so hey this experiment so here's
another thing that could be pitted in
that competition so imagine you had
people who men who could confer benefit
and who were incapable of inflicting
inflicting cost and men who could confer
benefit but were capable of inflicting
cost i think you'd see winners on that
side because of that free rider problem
and so and that ties into our what we'll
discuss in relationship to the dark
triad because
because
there's some
mystery about why women seem to be
attracted to these so-called dark triad
traits and i would say that they're
using them as insufficient markers for
the ability to or the acquisition of
status so and narcissists capitalize on
that right because a narcissist looks
confident
and lots of confident people are
competent but some confident people
aren't competent but they can fool you
yeah and then i think the other
explanation is that if you had to choose
between a benefit confer who could
punish free riders and one who couldn't
you should pick the former
uh one
who could one who could who could deal
with free riders who could and would had
the capability to and so
you see you see this sort of thing i
really like the disney movie beauty and
the beast
i think it i think they got it right and
so there's gaston in that movie and he's
a narcissist but he's he has physical
prowess like he can't understand why
he's not the guy
but he's narcissistic and then there's
the beast who's a beast but he's
tameable
and so he he can be a benefit confer and
he has the capacity to inflict cost
yes yeah and and the two are often
correlated in nature so like for example
if you have
physical prowess or athletic ability
then you have both the ability to confer
benefits you know in the form of say
protection or hunting skills but also
the ability to inflict costs by
you know okay so let's talk about the
dark triad then in relationship to
agreeableness because the do you want to
just tell everybody what the dark triad
is first so that we're all on the same
page
yeah so so the dark triad um
i think this was originally named by uh
uh one of your canadian psychology
colleagues del paula so yeah the ubc
and it the dark triad originally was uh
uh three
of triad uh but it's narcissism
machiavellianism and psychopathy so
where narcissism is typically marked by
a sense of grandiosity
um a sense of uh entitlement
um
uh they think they're the most
intelligent the smartest uh the most
attractive the most charming the most
skilled et cetera
uh
were in the words of one of my former
graduate students they think they're hot
but they're not
so
and i think i think there's a way in
which
people do have the ability to assess
whether that
high self-esteem
is warranted or not you know because we
have even words in our language for
things like arrogant you know that kind
of uh
uh
con out
someone who is uh thinks that they're
more beautiful or more intelligent or
more capable than they actually are so
that's narcissism but the entitlement is
i think a critical component of
narcissism where they feel i i'm so
great i deserve a larger share of the
pie including the sexual pie when we get
to the issue of sexual conflict and
sexual coercion uh machiavellianism i
mean that stems from the the the prince
of i can't remember how many hundreds of
years ago that was written but um it's
basically people who pursue
an exploitative social strategy so they
can they they are when we were talking
about reciprocity earlier they will
feign
reciprocity fame
being uh good reciprocators but then
they will
they will cheat and so these are
the the liars the cheaters
all right so if if the patriarchy was
based on exploitative power then dark
triad personality traits would be
adaptively and practically useful and
desirable
if that was the case yeah if that is the
case yes yes okay now and that gets
complicated because one of the things
your research has indicated is that
there is a manner in which women are
attracted to people who manifest dark
triad traits
yeah i would say i would add the
qualifier that it tends to be younger
women
so
teenagers or women in their early 20s
women as they mature and get more
experience on the mating market tend to
be less attracted to these uh dark triad
characters okay so here's a here's a
hypothesis it's not that easy to
distinguish the willingness to use
casual power and and control
from competence when you're not very
experienced and so the dark triad types
can feign feign status related
competence and they can ensnare naive
women yes yeah that that's right and
they they also have some qualities that
women genuinely do desire so the they
tend to like the narcissists tend to put
themselves at the center of attention
and one of the things we know about
status hierarchies is that
uh the attention structure is very
important that is the high status people
tend to be those to whom the most people
pay them the most attention
and so women are drawn i one anecdote a
female colleague of mine very
intelligent evolutionary psychologist
said went to a conference and found
herself very attracted to the organizer
of the conference and then six months
later
she he she encountered him and he was
just a normal attendee at the conference
and she didn't find him very attractive
she wanted what was i thinking but what
it was is he was he was at the center of
the attention structure well the the
attention structure is an unbelievably
reliable indicator of what's valuable
because we don't devote our visual
attentive resources to anything that
isn't of singular value in the
environment and so that's why we
precisely why we compete for attention
it's also an extremely valuable resource
absolutely so i mean a valuable and
limited resource it's finite and so
really at every moment in time we're
making decisions about what to allocate
our attention to i read a funny study
once you might be aware of this where
monkeys i think they were green monkeys
but i'm not sure
were shown photographs of
other members of their troop and they
gazed much longer at the high status
individuals in the photographs yeah so
and you know and then you think about
that too there's there's something
really interesting about that because
imagine that that compulsion to attend
to what acquired status or let's say
competence status is accompanied in
human beings by a profound instinct to
imitate
right that's right because um i mean
we are we are social learners and one of
the things that we try to do is to
emulate those who have qualities that
are associated with status you know and
and that that gets into you know and
those those vary from group to group and
subgroup to subgroup and in the modern
environment we have this uh kind of a
weird situation of a proliferation of
status hierarchies you know where you
can be the i don't know the top
social influencer where the only thing
you have going for you is i don't know a
line of makeup or something like that or
nothing at all i mean paris hilton was
like famous for being famous
and so she got a lot of attention but
there was no
no no real benefit there but you know we
have like uh you can if you're if you
play video games for example which which
i i don't happen to but uh their status
hierarchies within those you know the
most skilled video game player the most
skilled football player rugby player
tennis player yeah well it's a good
thing you know that we can create all
these competence hierarchies because
what it means is that diverse talents
have the opportunity to acquire the
status that might also all
alternatively
entice them to violence let's say
because that is associated with status
inequality and so one of the solutions
to status inco inequalities diverse
games of competence as diverse range as
possible yeah
and and that's i mean and that's
definitely a a good thing uh because i
mean if if there was just one
status hierarchy then that means um i
mean status is in inherently a relative
uh gauge by relative metric you know so
and
if you're the number one no one else can
be the number one uh but you know if you
can be the best uh
scholar the best writer the best uh
world of warcraft player the best tennis
player these multiple status hierarchies
gives more people give more people the
opportunity
to to gain in status another another
argument against the patriarchy as
unitary idea
right well which patriarchy do you mean
do you mean
like the evil coalition of plumbers
which is a joke i've made before
you know that's power is it plumbers
really no they're not organized in terms
of their success by which plumber is the
meanest and the toughest it's that's not
how it works at all
right so yeah absolutely and and i mean
that that gets into the
the issue of
uh oh there there are large pools of men
who were at the bottom of the status
hierarchy and
um who uh who who don't have the
qualities that that women desire and so
are they really oppressing
uh women there's this interesting
uh
cap there's an interesting photo that i
think got captioned but it's two very
elegant women with designer handbags and
they're walking by a guy who's like
fixing uh the the tar in the street he's
a street worker fixing the tar and as
they walk by this guy who's groveling on
the ground they they say stop oppressing
me right
so
anyway right right well i wanted to talk
to you a bit more about the dark triad
issue too because
there's a mystery in it and i think it's
one that corrupts psychology to some
degree research psychology oh yes okay
oh
so we didn't mention the third one oh
yes
the third element of the dark time which
is psychopathy uh and and you probably
have a deeper understanding of
psychopathy than than i do but um
one of the hallmarks is a lack of
empathy that is most normal humans have
an empathy circuit that we we feel
compassion if someone gets hurt or if a
pet gets injured or a child falls down
and skins a knee we feel a sense of
compassion
for the suffering of other people but
psychopaths don't it's like they might
laugh
uh if someone gets hurt and and so that
empathy circuit seems to be severed
uh and also one of the hallmarks seems
to be that they're
um not responsive to punishment
um that they're more oriented toward
reward wardens of punishing them doesn't
tend to change their behavior
it isn't obvious that they have an
empathy for their future selves
right so punishments like well
you know part of the reason that you
react to punishment is because you don't
want your future self to be punished
again but you have to care about that
before that works
right right yeah that gets the the issue
of uh steepness the steepness of future
discounting yes exactly exactly yeah
they um grab for all the gusto right now
and don't think about the future
consequences
so so one of the things that one of the
big five personality traits that the
dark triad is most associated with is
agreeableness low agreeableness and
that's and i do think that research
psychologists and psychologists in
general have a kind of ethical bias in
relationship to the agreeableness
dimension
you know and and it it and of course
women are higher in trade agreeableness
than men right reliably it's about half
a standard deviation it's one of the
biggest sex differences and it's
associated with compassion and
politeness in in the work we've done
anyways and so that's empathy at least
to some degree
now the question is
what is the ethical utility of lower
agreeableness right because you'd think
what would interfere possibly with
sharing
right because if you're more
compassionate and more compassionate
more empathic you're going to feel the
hunger of other people and you'd be more
motivated to to care for them let's say
but it's also possible that that low
agreeableness has
something to do with well perhaps
hunting prowess that might be part of it
but it also might be part of the
solution to the free rider problem
and so women are in a conundrum with
agreeableness right because they need a
mate who's agreeable enough so they can
bond with them and that will care for
their children and it cares in general
but they need someone who's disagreeable
enough so that they're capable let's say
of dealing with free riders
right yeah so one way of saying that is
uh agreeable
with respect to them but the potential
for being disagreeable with respect to
those others uh when they need to be
punished or they need to ward off an
attacker right and you could see that
that's a real tight line to walk down
you know and part of what constrains
agreeableness let's say from a
temperamental perspective so if you're
low in agreeableness let's say well
you're less empathic you're more
competitive you're rougher blunter
tougher you know emo what would you say
at least with regards to the at the
compassion you show to others
um and so what what helps modulate that
well some of that would be
conscientiousness and so in the dark
triad types you see low
conscientiousness as well you know
really low agreeable high conscientious
types are quite interesting because you
can trust them because they'll do their
duty but they're very blunt and direct
and harsh and that can be helpful as
well because they'll tell you unpleasant
truths even if they hurt your feelings
so there's some utility in that so you
can imagine that agreeableness can be
modified let's say by conscientiousness
so that and that takes the the
psychopathy edge off it because low
agreeableness and low conscientiousness
that's that's a rough combination
yes and so yeah yeah yeah because
there's nothing constraining it and so
women are attracted to some degree to
the lower agreeable types and i think
that accounts for the bad boy paradox
that you described at least in part
and maybe it takes further experience
and and wisdom on the part of judicious
women to see where they can get the
disagreeableness that's necessary but it
has to be hemmed in by something like
well conscientiousness uh yeah other
personality traits like
conscientiousness yeah i mean one other
reason that i think that women are
attracted to the dark triad at least the
younger women is
um
uh that they're often uh risk takers so
um they will do things like um
motorcycle jumping or or ski jumping or
take physical risk speeding in their
their cars or uh
and and so the kind of daredevil uh
mentality and women at least younger
women find that exciting but i wonder if
they can i wonder if they confuse that
with trait openness
right because the open types are going
to experiment they're going to try lots
of different things and that that
daredevil you know i don't care might be
easily
not easily distinguished from the
capacity to engage in creative
problem-solving pursuits you know and
and perhaps with courage as well
yeah yeah so i think i think
courage and also
one of the
you know that people who take risks
often in in fact have
the ability to afford those risks uh if
if you will so for example
you know doing some uh dangerous
athletic feat if if you're not an
athletic person you're going to fail at
that and so in some sense some of these
daredevil
behaviors i think are kind of cues that
you have the ability to afford to take
those risks but but these guys these
high dark triad guys are absolutely
disastrous as long-term mates um so that
they might be exciting for sure that's
why i think that women as they mature uh
stop being attracted to these guys
especially if they're looking for a
long-term mate because these are guys
they're the dark red they're more likely
to cheat they're more likely to seduce
and abandon them they're more likely to
engage in deceptive
mating tactics uh and so and so they
tend to be big trouble when it comes to
long-term mating
yeah well it also looks like they value
themselves greatly and you know
sometimes people value themselves
greatly and so they have high mate
desirability in in your in your
terminology or maybe some little
corruption of your terminology and again
i think the dark triad guys mimic that
it's like i'm so good i can afford to
you know
distribute my sexual prowess wherever i
see fit and there's some some of that
happens as men rise incompetence
hierarchies as well well yes and it
happens with women when they rise in
their heart how do you understand here's
a here's a question i'd really like to
hear you uh
answer
how do you distinguish
between
female and male
hierarchies for sexual selection because
of there are obviously women that are
more desirable to men
so what where where are the big sex
differences there i i know that men
women will mate
across and up competence hierarchies and
men will mate across and down roughly
speaking but there are other differences
yeah yeah there so so we recently
published a study on uh 14 different
cultures on the sex differences and
similarities and indeed there are
differences so even things like
physical attractiveness
it it increases both male and female
status but it increases female status
more than male status
why well what we argue is that um and
this is one thing my 37 culture studies
showed is that men place a greater
priority on physical attractiveness
physical appearance good looks
um and it's not an arbitrary
social construction it's um it's
basically an evolved preference for
fertility jews um those who
men who made it with infertile women
failed to become ancestors and so we're
all descendants of
i have to ask you this too here's
something i really got in trouble for
so i was doing an interview with
nbc reporter i don't remember who it was
but he didn't like me at all so he was
trying to catch me out in all sorts of
things and
we talked about makeup in the workplace
and i said that women use makeup to
enhance their sexual attractiveness and
man you wouldn't believe the flack i got
for that and i said well the the
reddening of the lips for example and
the rouging of the cheeks is not only a
signal to mimic youth and fertility but
it's likely associated with mimicry of
ripe fruit because our visual system
evolved to detect ripe fruit and if you
look through any advertising like any
magazine women's magazines in particular
the association between makeup and fruit
is there in the imagery all the time
so and and the flavor as well for that
matter so
did i say something that i shouldn't
have said am i wrong about that in some
important ways
you're not wrong about it but um but i i
know what you mean i've got some flack
for that as well and one thing
that uh you know on this finding that
men prioritize physical attractiveness
and that physical attractiveness is not
just this arbitrary social construction
but in fact
underlying it is a set of cues to youth
and cues to health and hence cues to
fertility
this is a very upsetting notion to some
people and so i was actually even before
i published the 37 culture study a uh i
gave a talk on it to a sociology
department when i was at michigan
and a professor female professor came up
to me afterwards and said
that i shouldn't publish the findings
and i said well why not because i you
know to me empirical findings are
empirical findings you know uh but she
said that that women had it hard enough
without um in competing with each other
on physical appearance without being
told that men have this evolved
preference for it you know and so the
you know the standard social science
model is more comfortable for people to
believe oh it's just arbitrary and
infinitely changeable you know and you
go to you know any different culture and
they value a whole different set of
things and the notion that they're that
we have evolved preferences for
fertility cues is uh anathema to some
people
but you can understand it to some degree
because a lot of these a lot of the
truths that psychologists have stumbled
over let's say are actually quite
painful i mean i reviewed the iq
literature for about 20 years trying to
get to the bottom of it and
it's very distressing to realize how
wide the
human
differential is in cognitive ability
it's it's really quite a staggering
thing to understand how broad that gap
is and how much pain that causes
especially at the lower end of the
distribution and the fact that
men are stringently selected for let's
say the capacity to acquire a position
in a competence hierarchy and women are
brutally punished in terms of their
sexual attractiveness for not
manifesting signs of fertility and youth
it's like there's a real harshness to
that but it's the harshness i think it's
the harshness of life
and actually understanding that makes it
less harsh insofar as understanding is
useful yeah yeah no i i would agree with
that and you know i mean
i've stumbled across a lot of findings
in my research and and we'll get to the
issue of conflict between the sexes uh
that that i find
personally distressing you know that i
wish didn't exist
but they do and so i i feel
similarly that you know we're better off
confronting
our nature and the empirical reality
including sex differences in that nature
rather than just pretending that
these features don't exist
well we also should be very cognizant of
the fact that the counter claim which is
that well there are no biological uh
what what you see structures underlying
our perception sexual perception and
otherwise and or cognition so we have no
biological nature which means we're
it means we're uh infinitely amenable to
social utopian schemes that are designed
to turn us into a particular vision of
human and there's great danger in that
too so that's the other side of the coin
there's danger everywhere yeah well what
i would say is yeah the
the yeah implicit in those notions is
that humans are
passive
passive vehicles rather than active
strategists
that can be easily manipulated by
whatever
and that's not a very
that's not a very flattering view of
humans
uh so um
no and it's justified some rather wide
scale social engineering attempts in the
last hundred years yeah yeah so so it is
a real danger it's not it's
and then that that doesn't take away
anything from the fact that there are
such thing there is such thing as
unpleasant fact
yeah so and it's it's reasonable to be
cognizant of that so
so you were going to talk a little bit
about um
uh uh let's talk about violence say
between men and women one of the things
i was struck by in your chapter on
violence the way it opened
people i studied aggression for a long
time in in little kids in
uh in
elementary school children adolescents
all the way up developmental origins of
aggression with with tremblay in
montreal and
so i'm very interested in that and i i
think often that psychologists have
things backwards when we approach
questions you know so for example we
often try to explain anxiety instead of
explaining its control which is way
harder to do because
like of course you're anxious that's
bloody obvious why aren't you terrified
out of your skull all the time is the
question and i think it's the same with
aggression it's we it's often treated as
if aggression itself is something that
needs to be explained whereas for me the
mystery is well no
aggression not of course
the mystery is how we control it that's
the mystery yeah and so yeah well and
and and we do i mean it's um you know
aggression is selectively
deployed uh you know and is very context
specific and i mean it gets back to i
mean it depends on i don't know whether
you were
whether you studied physical aggression
but you were asking earlier about
differences between male and female
hierarchies and one of the things that
is well documented is that while men are
higher in physical aggression
including all up to homicide women um
engage in
social aggression or what sometimes
called relational aggression where they
they shun someone or exclude someone or
[__] shame another woman and so that's a
form of aggression yeah reputation
savaging yes yeah derogation of
competitors
um so but but
but
it but all these forms of aggression are
typically deployed very selectively you
know it's not like we don't wake up in
the morning go out and beat someone up
you know even those who engage in
physical aggression uh it's often
someone has um humiliated them in public
for example um or or challenged their
their status and but uh that's one thing
or they've perceived that however
incorrectly yes yeah so one of the
things that i studied is um a homicidal
ideation
you know and i looked at um you know
have you ever had a homicidal thought
have you ever thought about killing
someone and basically i mean the
majority of people have thought about it
and even even though if they haven't
they'll say something like when i pose
this question just informally at say a
party people say oh no i've never
thought about killing someone
but then the conversation will proceed
and then they'll say actually there was
this one time when someone humiliated me
in front of the whole group and i just
had this thought about killing them and
so fortunately most homicidal
thoughts don't get translated into
homicidal deeds otherwise we'd be living
in a very chaotic society
but um but one of the things that we
found in that research was that being
humiliated in
in public in the eyes of the peer group
meaning you're going to lose your status
was a key trigger of this homicidal
ideation
well okay so let me run something by you
in relationship to emotional regulation
and status tell me what you think about
this so the terror management theorist
types tend to think that our cognitive
beliefs inhibit our anxiety and they
drill that all the way down to anxiety
of death taking a page from freud and
that's becker's book basically and
there's a whole field of psychology
that's worked on that
i think it's i don't think it's
right i think it's more indirect so
imagine this
imagine that
the degree to which your negative
emotion is regulated
is dependent on
serotonin serotonergic output
fundamentally so as your serotonin
levels rise you're more emotionally
stable so you feel less anxiety despair
the whole panoply of negative emotions
which are pretty tightly clumped
together
and so then you might say well your
emotion
emotional regulation is dependent on
your status
and i think there's truth in that now
let's say i do
we're at an academic conference and i
stand up and i ask you a question
and it's a mean question but you can't
answer it so your status is devalued but
here's what i've actually done it's not
exactly that i've devalued your status
what i've done is undermined
the claim that you have a valid claim on
that position yeah
right and then that's going to
disregulate you because if that's true
then while you've been shown to be an
imposter let's say and or at least the
threat is there and then that would take
you out of that hierarchy and your
negative emotion would rise and then the
reason it would
rise is because if you are removed from
that hierarchy and now you're alienated
and isolated everything has become way
more dangerous yes and so right and you
know you know the people at the bottom
of a hierarchy are much less much more
likely to die from all cause mortality
this is not nothing right this is
crucial getting killed uh yes including
that yeah so so to threaten that and
then you say well that invokes homicidal
ideation quite rapidly it's like well if
you're interfering with the
with the person's claim on a position
that actually does regulate their
negative emotion as well as actually
protect them from death not just death
anxiety it's no wonder that you evoke a
counter response which would be a blunt
form of reestablishing something like
competence yes yeah no i think that
that's right and i share your um
your views of the terror management
notion you know that that we evolved all
these mechanisms all these adaptations
simply to keep the fear of death at bay
and anxiety associated with that obey
you know my argument would be will
people actually have to solve problems
of survival and reproduction you know
yes the problem of death is worse than
the problem of death anxiety yes death
anxiety is bad you know make no and i
like becker's book but fundamentally
yeah no yeah a lot the logic doesn't
doesn't work um but uh i published a a
short
uh commentary on terror management some
time ago and
uh with the terror management people
just ignored it i mean i was so what did
you say oh well i basically said you
know argued that um
they were proposing all these
psychological adaptations simply to keep
the thought and anxiety associated with
death at bay and uh from an evolutionary
perspective although they
purport to ground it in an evolutionary
perspective it's not really an
evolutionary perspective because you
have to tie
an adaptive solution to
some element that is tributary to
survival or reproduction you know and
and not simply
adaptations solely to deal with internal
psychological states
except if those internal psychological
states get translated into things that
lead to survival and reproduction or
have over the course of human
evolutionary history yeah or interfered
with it i mean i guess i i have some
respect for that line of theorizing
because the fact that human beings are
self-conscious and other creatures
aren't does mean that our anxiety is of
a different i'd say a qualitative type
than other animals anxiety but
that still doesn't interfere with the
fact that a lot of the structures that
we built to deal with death anxiety
actually stop us from dying they're not
mere defenses they're not ego mere ego
defenses although sometimes they can
also be that
and so and also the other problem with
becker and the terror management
theorists it's sort of related to the
patriarchy problem i would say is that
becker
becker didn't read jung by the way even
though he wrote a book on the psychology
of religion and he said in the intro
that it was unnecessary to read jung
which was exactly wrong given what he
was doing but becker basically posited
that
we had to create fabrications to defend
ourselves against negative emotion
that's the essential message of that
book and what that means in some sense
is that the whole corpus of of human
endeavor is an attempt to escape from
the realization of mortality and i think
well
wait a sec no
we're also escaping from mortality
yes right it's not just the thoughts of
it and and it isn't obvious to me at all
and i think almost all of clinical
psychology would suggest that this is
true is that falsification as a defense
is actually counterproductive in the
final analysis and most of the great
clinical theorists rogers say perhaps in
some sense foremost among them but
perhaps not insisted that it was the
truth that set you free not the web of
defenses that you had erected by
necessity to deal with your neurotic
death anxiety that's actually
counterproductive yeah so
yeah there's a reminded me of uh of uh
woody allen and woody allen's very uh i
guess he's sort of been cancelled and is
out of favor but he had this one quote
where people said well you know um you
know you will achieve immortality
through your your work and he said he
said i don't want to achieve immortality
through my work i want to achieve
immortality through not dying yeah
that's a very good line it's a very good
line and yeah very germane to the
problem
so you said that you had uncovered
things that deeply disturbed you in your
research as well
ethically i would say and so so can you
touch on some of that
well uh well yeah i mean so well one is
uh
well one pertains to some of the sex
differences that we've already been
talking about so just as men
place a greater value on physical
attractiveness than women in their may
selection women place a greater value on
immense status and resources and so you
could say
well you know men view women as sex
objects but women view men as success
objects you know and so they're both
you know forms of objectification
if you will although i don't really like
that
like that term
uh and so um i remember giving a lecture
once and i was describing these findings
and and uh it was like i think a
freshman guy on the front row he was
getting he got really upset by this and
he said you mean you mean i have to
have to
achieve at at work in order to be
attracted to women
i said well i mean i guess it's not
strictly necessary but if you want to
improve your chances um yeah so uh so uh
you know it it's just as it's
harder for people who are
at the bottom end of the things that
people value
um you were mentioning intelligence
earlier but if you're at the bottom end
of attractiveness or or success or
status or resources it's not a very
pleasant position to be in so that
that's one set of things another though
well it's also the the what's
interesting about that too if you don't
mind me saying so
the evolutionary psychological argument
actually indicates more deeply the
intractability and danger of that
problem
right because it that the problem of
being at the bottom is so deep that we
shouldn't rush to solve it with you know
surface level solutions that aren't
going to work so you see for example
very frequently people think
well
hierarchy is
a western construct it's dependent on
capitalism it's like wait a second if
you want to solve the problem of poverty
and exclusion and oppression
and you start that by equating something
as profound and deep as hierarchy with
capitalism you're not going anywhere
because you have no idea how big this
problem is it's way bigger than
capitalism yeah yeah yeah absolutely i
mean status hierarchies i mean as you've
written about are evolutionarily ancient
uh and yeah and so you think i'm okay
like i've been i took a lot of flack for
all that you know my comparison with
lobster say which you know because
antidepressants work on lobsters which
is something i think is absolutely
phenomenal and it it pertains to the
serotonin argument right it's it's so
widely distributed all the way down the
phylogenetic chain
that serotonin even regulates negative
emotion in lobsters this is old you know
and lots of people objected well why do
you pick lobsters and it's you know as
if i was overstating the biological
conclusions right what do you think
about this yeah well you know
status hierarchies are are
pretty ubiquitous uh
and i guess what i would say is that
they i mean you didn't have to pick
lobsters but you you could have picked
chimpanzees or any number of other
species and and still been essentially
cool even non-social birds like even
birds that don't have troops and
strictly a hierarchy they have a
positional hierarchy in terms of
territory yeah and the ones that have
the best nesting sites are much more
likely to mate and survive so even in
many animals that don't have a hierarchy
specifically it's still there implicitly
that's right that's right and and this
is this gets to one of the other i guess
the
uh the broader implicit
uncomfortable truths is that
we value different people differently
so and and that this of course applies
in the mating domain of mate value some
are higher some are low
and that's mostly what i've focused on
but it also applies to friendship value
coalitional value that we value
different individuals differently
based on their competence based on their
benefit conferring ability and
willingness uh and people find this
uncomfortable they you know we we're
and this is one of the i think
conceptual confusions of this like uh
all people are created equal well you
know there are different meanings of
that one is uh equal in terms of rights
you know which they should be equal in
terms of opportunities equal before the
law
equal in terms of their natural rights
right right which that which is i think
the correct usage of that but are they
actually equal in value in what other
people value in the end well i've always
asked people like who who hit me with us
like do you sleep with everyone
no oh you're selective are you well
isn't that ex oppression inclu exclusion
and judgment at the most fundamental
level and is that something you really
want to sacrifice yeah and yeah and the
the answer is no and and
uh the answer is only rude people ask
questions like that well or you know uh
or confused you know who haven't really
thought through these issues
no i meant the rude person was me asking
that question
but i mean hey we're in the business of
asking hard questions i don't think
they're they're rude um no i don't think
they are either they're just they're
just pointed it's like wait you exclude
sexually there is no more dramatic form
of exclusion than that yes
that's right um
well that's why people object to
evolutionary psychology it's like it is
it is a brutalness about it especially
in female choosiness and not not that
men are any better because of course
they do the same thing in different ways
but it really is brutal and to be
rejected by someone that you're
attracted to that's no joke that's
that's a rough dagger yeah absolutely
and and and of course breakups are among
the most traumatic experiences that
people go through you know
the dissolution of a marriage for
example
um you know these these cause people to
spiral into depression uh alcohol abuse
et cetera
uh so um
but um yeah
it's uh so let's let can we talk about
differences in those differences in
aggression again you know because as you
said men are more likely to use physical
aggression and by the way there is good
data you may know this already but
um
trombley's group
in particular looked at this if you take
two-year-olds
boys and girls and you group them
together
two-year-olds are the most aggressive of
any age group that you can group
together
kidding kicking biting the two-year-olds
will do more of it but
most two-year-olds don't and almost all
the small minority that do are male
so it's there at two now almost all of
them get socialized by the age of four
and so they come to inhibit that
aggression that's they're probably low
in agreeableness that would be my guess
and some of them are probably higher
negative emotions so they're more
reactive you know more volatile but most
of them are socialized by the age of
four but their research group showed
that if they aren't socialized by the
age of four
then it's permanent
so that's where the career criminal
types come from and but they they tend
to re
they tend to desist around the age of 28
it drops off for some reason that isn't
well understood yet yeah well i guess
yeah 28 uh um
well you know i mean it seems like
at least in adulthood when physical
aggression if you charted by age and sex
it's basically when males even though
they do exhibit it early on as you
mentioned when they enter reproductive
competition the physical aggression goes
way out oh oh and in the same data set
so what happens with these long-term
aggressive boys so they're more
aggressive than the rest of the boys
except the boys catch up on average when
puberty hits for a few years and then
they go down yeah
reproductive competition and
um
to to other colleagues of yours up in
canada martin daley and margaret wilson
have shown these age and sex
distributions and i mean it's really
start
and the exacerbation of that by
inequality
yes that's right that's right which is
another another issue uh
you know the magnitude of inequality and
and
um
uh
inequality leveling you know richard
rangham has a as an interesting idea
that
one of the ways like what
gets back to the issue of the origins of
monogamy that in in humans and this is
to a lesser degree the case in chimps i
think but it's certainly true in humans
that
uh
an alpha male can be deposed by
uh two lower ranking males two or three
gang up and his view is if someone gets
to the top and there's a cost inflicting
male he didn't quite phrase it this way
then then people gang up and kill
you know right another argument against
against totalitarian brutality as the
basis of the patriarchy it actually
doesn't work
yeah right and for that reason yeah i
talked i actually talked to rangam about
about exactly that so that's those
mechanisms are already there
and so aggregation a lot of these
strategies that you outline in your book
as alternatives in some sense to
monogamy to stable monogamy
they're i would say there's there's
something like
sub-optimal solutions on a fitness
landscape right they're better than
they're better than the alternative
possibly which would be like zero
success whatsoever but they're nowhere
near as good as the optimal solution
which is something like generous
monogamy something like that perhaps is
that is that naive or reasonable do you
think well i i don't know i mean i i
tend to
um
i have a little bit of an internal
conflict on that issue because i sort of
as a scientist i feel like i have to be
non-judgmental with respect to if there
are multiple evolved mating strategies
which i think there are
um i i try to be non-judgmental about
that but from a you know my own personal
um ethical viewpoint i think monogamy
it is a great solution
um i mean among others
you think it might be it might be
possible to rank or the to some degree
scientifically to keep it in line with
like let's call it ethical intuitions
assuming they're just not artificial
constructions because it could be that
partials like like i said partial
solutions are better than none but
they're nowhere near as good as an
optimized solution and so like long-term
monogamy might be something like the
best strategy all things considered
now sometimes all things aren't
considered and you have to do what you
have to do let's say you know divorce
would fit into that and so forth but
that doesn't mean that that optimality
that we have
potentially a moral intuition for isn't
pointing to something that that is in
fact well i would say at least in
potential evolved as well as socially
constructed yeah so so i guess what i
would say is that
um the key question is optimal for whom
so
so and this is where we get into some
conflicts between the sort of
group harmony and individual uh
benefits so so in polygenic societies as
we were talking about earlier let's say
you have one man has four wives that
means three men have no wives so having
the four wives from a purely
reproductive standpoint might be optimal
for that individual male but it's of
course sub-optimal disastrously
sub-optimal for the for the three males
who have zero mates
well yeah but he also might be more
prone and i mean we know the polygonist
societies they tend to be more violent
the younger men tend to be more violent
so i would say that right he's on he's
on top but
but
you know a knife in the back takes out
the strongest man and that's a real
problem in human beings because even if
it is physical prowess at least
that puts you up at the top which is
something that like a real dominating
chimp might manage
you know knives pretty much equalize the
playing field or clubs or anything like
that yeah yeah and i think we have these
kind of uh
hierarchy leveling adaptations and and
if you go across cultures they even have
phrases for us like in australia they
have them they call it um the tall
poppies and people like to cut down tall
poppies or in japan they say the the
nail that sticks out gets pounded down
so there's this uh
personality psychology i don't know if
you remember the um like rb cattell even
had a concept uh raymond cattell had a
concept called coercion toward the
biosocial norm where he said people
like to cut down people who are too
dominant so that the meek will inherit
the earth so it's not quite right but
it's the way i think we do have these
well i also i also think that that that
cutting down that's an interesting thing
as well because one of the things that
groups of men do i i that i and i think
this is something relatively unique to
men i might be wrong
is that when they're in groups they
often throw uh denigrating barbs at one
another to watch the emotional reaction
and i think part of that tall poppy
cutting down is an attempt to eradicate
the detrimental effects of undue
narcissism it's not so much actual
competence it's it's and i know that if
you're competent and you are at the top
there may be some danger to you because
given that you're more the center of
attention you're also more the center of
negative attention so that that is a
danger but i suspect that a lot of those
mechanisms were directed toward the dark
triad types and control of their
unweaning arrogance right exactly if
they're if they're uh inflicting costs
rather than conferring benefits or
monopolizing resources rather than
sharing them with other members of the
group you know that those are going to
be hierarchy hierarchy levelers i mean
even in some sense the in modern weird
modern environments the uh tax code that
imposes a higher tax rate on people who
make more money is kind of a form of
hierarchy level
yeah well
it's
it's a tough problem to solve right it's
a really hard problem to solve and i
think the evolutionary psychologists
have made this even more evident as we
referred to earlier like the differences
that are driving these these
inequalities are very very deep and
they're it's very difficult to figure
out how you might deal with them
socially even on the conservative end of
the spectrum i think it's worth noting
that excess inequality breeds violence
among young men
that's worth noting it's like well you
let the inequality get too out of hand
you're going to destabilize the whole
society and then unless you want to live
in a gated community let's say and the
gates can easily turn into walls and
then that's indistinguishable from a
prison that's not really a very good
idea and so how to shovel resources down
the hierarchy in some way that's
what would you say that's not
counterproductive
that's that's a problem that we're all
constantly struggling with yes yeah
indeed and um
and i think
it's even
i mean you had mentioned intelligence
research and and here's i'd like to get
your thoughts on this
uh is that one of the things that we
know is that there's strong assorted
mating for intelligence uh you know and
part of that might be due to the
educational system that is you know you
meet people go to college or higher
degrees and you tend to mate with people
with whom you're in close proximity
um but um but we know the assortment of
mating coefficients for intelligence is
about 0.45 it's one of the highest
assorted mating coefficients right so
that's the tendency for people to marry
people who are like them in some manner
yeah yeah so that means the the the high
intelligence are mating with the highs
and the lows with lows but one of the
consequences of that to the degree that
intelligence is heritable and it is
partly heritable that creates in the
next generation an increase in
variance in intelligence of the
offspring generation and so if you
iterate it
generation after generation you're
actually getting
more and more variants on this so
socially valued uh dimension which will
increase to the degree that intelligence
is linked with things like resource
acquisition or status attainment then
you're going to create an increase in
inequality
well that's that's i would say you know
i think that's probably what's happened
to us you know i'm here let me run
something wild by you and you tell me
what you think of this
i've done various
interpretations of the stories in
genesis the story of adam and eve in
particular and it's eve that makes
adam's self conscious in that story
and that's that's put forth as a as a
what would you say
a world-shattering event
it's associated with the emergence of
morality that's knowledge of good and
evil and it's associated with the
knowledge of death
to get enough cognitive development
driven by sexual selection you become
self-conscious aware of your own
mortality that's the first thing and
that's our cataclysm no other creatures
ever dealt with that and then having
become aware of your own mortality and
your vulnerability you know the
difference between good and evil because
now you understand what would hurt
something like you like you actually
understand it unlike a lion who's just
eating a gazelle and then you can use
that
and so and then in in that story well in
some sense it's blamed on eve but the
the selection pressure that you
described in association with the
choosingness of women i think it's i
don't see how it can be denied that that
was a prime mover of our cognitive
transformation away from the chimpanzee
line
sexual selection that drove that i think
yeah yeah i think i think that's right i
mean i mean because there's
you know um we didn't get this um big
brain from
learning how to pick berries a little
bit better or whatever i mean it's a
these survival problems don't really get
you there well and you need a runaway
process right and the assortative mating
issue that you described would be a
contributor to that runaway process
because this cortical evolution happened
very rapidly yes right so rapidly that
women's bodies are barely adapted to our
babies right wider hips they wouldn't be
able to run
right bigger head it wouldn't pass
through the birth canal and women's
bodies are compromised to some degree by
the necessity of giving birth and then
babies are born
when they're still unbelievably helpless
because if they were any bigger than
that their heads would be too big plus
they're crushable their heads i mean
it took a lot of gerrymandering to make
that that runaway selection process
biologically viable yeah yeah well one
interesting thing about that is also
is um
uh with
the advent of c-sections
uh
where babies are uh you know they
basically cut the mother open to take
the baby out rather than through the
birth canal
is probably creating a modern selection
pressure for larger and larger heads
um
as a result so so this is uh evolution
is ongoing here in this process
so
maybe we can close with one thing unless
you have something else you'd really
like to discuss
i would like to discuss a little bit
more about why men and women have
different
strategies of aggression
yeah okay uh so yeah well and and also
well i mean i guess we'll have to there
are many interesting things that i would
love to talk about uh associated with
the with with my new book on conflict
between the sexes and we've touched on
on a few but uh i'd love to talk more
about those but
um
you know i think that
you know male and female
status hierarchies are are
uh i mean there's some similarities but
there's some so fundamentally different
and i don't know if you've ever had this
experience jordan but um the way i
describe it i i find
and i think most men find male
hierarchies to be fairly transparent
that is we can sort of uh observe them
they're clear
um there's not a big mystery but we also
tend i would say we also tend to exclude
males that aren't transparent like that
yeah it's like he's too much trouble
right so no no i want to know exactly
where i stand with you and we're going
to sort that out right now right right
and and they do sort it out but but with
women
um the way i feel you know those movies
where uh there's like these uh banked
bank robbers and they're breaking into a
bank but the bank has these infrared uh
detectors so they have to put on special
goggles so that they can see the red
lines and avoid tripping the alarm i
feel like
that with respect to female hierarchies
like i don't have the goggles to see it
because i'll go like go to a party or
something and then leave and a woman
will say something like did you hear
what that [__] said
and i was like right there and i didn't
hear anything but there's this kind of
underlying um
meta message that women pick up on with
respect to other women that i don't i
don't i don't feel like i understand
but do you do you know if there's any
studies
indicating whether men or or women are
better at detecting who's in a
relationship with who
i don't know of any studies
on that but i would
hazard a guess that women are better at
it than men
i mean is what is that your intuition
yes yes definitely definitely i mean
i've watched my wife do that on several
occasions those two people are
are together no they're not they're
married to other people
oh turns out yeah they they are she
could pick it up in way well and we know
that women are better at decoding
non-verbal behavior than men yeah and
that's probably partly because they have
to be more attentive to it because it's
more dangerous for them if they're not
and they have to pick up the cues of
their non-verbal infants and right so
exactly so i think it's i think that
this would get to the issue of um
mind-reading abilities uh ability to
infer
the psychological states of other humans
and i think that that at least on in
many domains women are better at that
um you know if you want to think that's
associated with trait agreeableness that
would be fun to find out if that's
actually a function of trait
agreeableness because that would imagine
that some of that understanding is
actually embodiment so if i'm empathic
i'm better at mirroring your emotions in
my body and then i can pick up what
you're feeling by referring to what i'm
feeling that's what we do when we go to
a movie right because we vicariously
live the emotions in the movie but
it stands to reason that there's
variability and i suspect it's
agreeableness because that's empathy and
and likely maternal caregiving yeah
yeah so that's i mean that's a really
interesting question i i'm not aware of
studies that have systematically looked
at that uh individual well the
psychologists are loath to associate
agreeableness with maternality right
because we're loath to make any claims
in the current political climate that
any of these dimensions might be
associated with something like you know
the fundamental difference between the
sexes even though there are huge sex
differences in agreeableness and they
get bigger in egalitarian societies
which is really quite something right
right contrary to
the standard social science social role
theories uh
that it predicted that yeah
not just contrary but like well i would
say death blow but it's not exactly
right because some differences do
decline as egalitarianism increases so
right you know it's complicated like
everything else so
male aggression again well we have we're
bigger we're taller we have more upper
body strength so women aren't going to
engage in physical combat with men not
past puberty and you know they develop
that increase in trait negative
emotionality at puberty it's not there
in china oh really okay and it's
permanent no it's permanent once it's
instantiated once once the pubertal
changes take place
and so and i here's a something here's a
question i have for you i really want to
ask you this okay
what do you think of the theory that
so women are higher in trait negative
emotion right and they're higher in
agreeableness so here's a theory
women's personalities are adapted for
the mother infant diet not for their
not for them
that the fundamental unit is the dyad
and and their temperament is adjusted
for that that's why they're more fearful
yeah yeah no i think that that's got to
be right i mean you know the
women
over evolutionary history have been the
primary caretakers of the infants at
least for the first few years of life
the mothers and their female kin the
aloe parents
as they're called and so i think that
that's exactly right they have to be the
the costs of failing to detect danger
for example uh
affect not just them but also the
survival of their infant and so i think
that
you know maternal bond to the infant is
has got to be at least one of the
contributing factors to that sex
difference in negative emotionality also
also the world is a more dangerous place
for a mother and infant than just for a
mother
because the infant is so vulnerable and
also the mother is hindered in her
adaptive ability by the presence of the
infant to a substantial degree
especially when well in societies where
the infant is being carried virtually
all the time right which is which is
interesting to bring it back full circle
is one reason why
women value a man's ability and
willingness to offer protection for her
and her children so highly in a mate and
so you'd think that well in the modern
environment you know
physical protection
is not that important but women continue
to value those traits
as well as things like courage and
bravery the
willingness to actually use that
in the service of protecting her
yeah and it's all it's it it's also not
all that self-evident that
that physical capacity to protect has
been ameliorated to an overwhelming
degree in the modern environment it's
still plenty dangerous yeah it's still
plenty dangerous but
but it might not be so much as it was
yeah yeah less so than it was i mean i
think steve pinker has
documented that pretty successfully and
uh you know that there's been a general
decline and i know this from studying
homicide there's been over the last 400
years of decline in homicide rates um
broadly speaking although this
interestingly there's been a spike in
homicide race due to the pandemic
or within the pandemic
so and i have some speculations about
that but
um
but you know i i think you know there's
so many
other topics that we could talk about i
hope we will get a chance to at some
point yeah i would really like to we
scratched the surface today but yeah
so i would very much i'm going to talk
to bob trivers next week as it turns out
so very much looking so this is a really
good preparation for that as well so
yeah i really your work has meant a lot
to me and it's it's helped explain a lot
to me and and so um i thank you very
much for that for the courage to to do
it to pursue it and in the face of you
know substantive opposition to what
you're finding you know you know you've
discovered something true when you're a
social scientist when you're not very
happy about what you discovered
yeah yeah yeah that's true well
i have just
to end on the positive note i've also
studied love and the the evolutionary
psychology of love and so um it's one of
the gets back to your point about good
and evil and i i think humans have
evolved adaptations to commit horrors on
other people but also adaptations to be
altruistic and benefit conferring on
other individuals and so
scott scott barry kaufman has tried to
psychometrically outline a a light triad
yes yeah yeah so but i think we we all
have these um
capacities within us and so and and and
the more we learn the more we can create
environments that kind of suppress the
the darker more evil uh side of human
nature and bring out the more benefit
conferring side
well it would be fun to do another
discussion on on something like the
evolution of benevolence you know
something that's really positive like
that yes so yeah okay well good let's do
that okay so thank you well it's been
fun talking to you and uh boy there is
so much more to talk about
yeah i know well that's that's
what would you say that's that's what
you realize whenever you have a really
good conversation yeah so i appreciate
it very much and and uh i i do hope we
we talk again in the relatively near
future okay so i do too well thank you
thank you so much and best of luck with
your uh conversation with bob trivers
he's he's a fascinating guy so i'm sure
you have a very interesting conversation
yeah i'm looking forward to talking to
you about self-deception that's
something i thought about for a very
long time so yeah and hopefully tried to
stop practicing so
if you find the keys let me know
all right all right thank you very much
and and good luck with your book and so
that's this this is part of one of the
books we were talking about today why
when men behave badly and that's
certainly not all it's about and thanks
very much for talking to me today okay
thank you gordon it's been a delight
[Music]
you